#PHP-in-Java: execute PHP code from within Java and Groovy

##Introduction

###Why would I want to execute PHP from within my Java code?

As a consultant, I have spent a lot of time moving back and forth between two Open Source
communities: Java and PHP. Despite some major criticisms against its verbosity and depth,
Java has left an indelible mark on software development and developers. If there's a 
programming problem to be solved, odds are you can find a solution or a pattern for solving
it in the Java ecosystem.

But long before Java was usable for writing Web applications, PHP was making it possible for a
host of new developers to write CGI scripts without shouldering the burden of learning PERL
or C. Like Java, PHP's ecosystem is thriving, especially given its adoption at the heart of
many major Web companies the likes of Facebook and [Squidoo](http://www.squidoo.com).

Essentially, what we have are two beautiful worlds of software, and a lot of overlap. But
where they don't overlap, I seem to find myself working in one language and longing for the
features of the other. For some time now it has been possible to access [Java code from
within PHP](http://www.php.net/manual/en/java.examples-basic.php). But accessing PHP from
within Java has never been as straight-forward.

###So, how does it work?

As it turns out, years ago an enterprising company named [Caucho](http://caucho.com) 
decided to write the "most reliable application server in the Open Source market." Their
core product is a Java EE compliant Web server they call *Resin*, and at its core is *Quercus*:
a fast PHP interpreter written in cross-platform Java.

And if your goal is to run PHP in a Java EE Web container, then you've found a great tool. 

But I wondered if I could use Quercus from within any old Java application, and at along last gain
access to my favorite PHP libraries from within Java.  As it turns out, this is quite possible. 
I've recently pushed out my first Java-wrapped PHP library: [GeSHi4J](http://github.com/collegeman/geshi4j),
my favorite code highlighting library is now available to me in any Java application!

##Writing Your Own Wrappers

###Using the PHP wrapper API

The following examples, while not practical on an individual basis, should be used in
combination to create great PHP wrappers.

####Executing a PHP script

PHP scripts may be loaded from the classpath (my personal favorite, as the scripts end up packed 
with the Java code in a JAR file), loaded from the local file system (by a `File` object or a
simple file path), or remotely via HTTP.

	PHP php = new PHP("classpath:/com/faux/php/HelloWorld.php");
	
Once loaded into memory, several execution options become available to you.

####Calling global functions

Like so

	PHPObject returnValue = php.fx("function_name", arg1, arg2, ...);
	
	// or...
	PHPObject returnValue = php.fx("function_name", new Object[]{arg1, arg2});
	
	// or...
	List args = new ArrayList<Object>();
	params.add(arg1);
	params.add(arg2);
	PHPObject returnValue = php.fx("function_name", args.toArray());
	
The return type of the `fx(String, Object ... args)` method is an instance of our <a href="http://aaroncollegeman.com/static/projects/php-in-java/javadoc/net/collegeman/phpinjava/PHPObject.html">`PHPObject`</a> class, which wraps a special kind of Quercus object called <a href="http://www.caucho.com/resin-javadoc/com/caucho/quercus/env/Value.html">`Value`</a>. Through our `PHPObject` API you can 

* retrieve a `String` version of the `Value`'s content with `toString()`
* read/write object properties with `getProperty(String property)` and `setProperty(String property, Object newValue)`
* invoke object methods with `invokeMethod(String name, Object ... args)`
* gain direct access to the wrapped `Value` object through `getWrappedValue()`

Extra line of text here to create whitespace between unordered list and H4. :-P
 
####Setting and reading global variables

	// write
	php.set("variable_name", value);
	
	// read
	PHPObject value = php.get("variable_name");
	
####Instantiating PHP classes

	// create instance
	PHPObject myInstance = php.newInstance("MyPHPClass", arg1, arg2, ...);
	
	// read and write properties
	PHPObject propertyValue = myInstance.getProperty("propertyName");
	myInstance.setProperty("propertyName", newValue);
	
	// invoke methods
	PHPObject returnValue = myInstance.invokeMethod("methodName", arg1, arg2, ...);
	
####Capturing the output of your script

	// load a script
	PHP myScript = new PHP("classpath:/path/to/myscript.php");
	
	// do stuff with your script
	myScript.set("global_variable", "foo");
	myScript.fx("process_foo");
	
	// capture output
	String output = myScript.toString();	
	
####Executing arbitrary snippets of PHP

	// when no other scripts have yet been parsed
	PHP php = new PHP();
	php.snippet("<?php echo 'Hello, world!'");
	String output = php.toString(); // == "Hello, world!"
	
	// and when a script block is already open
	PHP php = new PHP("classpath:/path/to/myscript.php");
	php.snippet("my_function('foo', 'bar');");
	String output = php.toString();
	
	

	
	

	



